Extracting hidden information from human mobility patterns is one of the long-standing challenges of urban studies. In addition, exploring the relationship between urban functional structure and traffic spatial interaction pattern has long been of interest. Recently, vehicle GPS trajectory data emerged as a popular data source for revealing human mobility patterns and urban functions. However, few studies have fully leveraged traffic interaction information that is hidden in human mobility patterns to identify urban functions at the road segment level. To address this issue, a geo-semantic analysis framework was introduced in this study to model the relationship between traffic interaction and urban functions at the road segment level. First, a Road-Trajectory corpus was built and trained to obtain the semantic embedding representation of road segments. Then, considering topological connections between road segments, we used a graph convolutional neural network model to process the contextual and topological information to classify social functions along streets. A case study in Beijing, China, using a large volume of real-world taxi trajectories data, was conducted. The results show that our proposed methods, with relative less loss and high accuracy, outperform other comparative methods for classifying urban functions at the road segment level. This work contributes to the assessment of urban functional structure, and further aiding urban planners in designing better urbanization strategies with regard to traffic interaction and urban space structure.
The best way of sensing places has long been an interest in GIScience and urban studies. Previous studies detect and understand places via traditional human participant-oriented studies, which are laborious, time-consuming, and sometimes subjective. The proliferation of multi-sourced geospatial data brings unprecedented opportunities for researchers to improve assessment and understanding of places in cities. However, it remains insufficient to explore place based on a single or naïve set of geospatial data owing to issues of completeness and bias. Of particular interest is extracting and understanding thematic place using geospatial data. In this paper, we attempt to extract thematic place at a community scale and investigate the potential capability of multi-sourced geospatial data to understand extracted place. First, thematic places were constructed by integrating urban road networks and community detection methods in a complete network field. Then, we implemented quantitative geographical semantic analyses using geo-tagged street view images and point-of-interest data to investigate thematic places at a community scale for urban perception. A case study in a high-density urban environment, Wuhan City, China, was employed to illustrate its application to communities. The approach and the results of our study demonstrate the ability to extract and understand thematic places from a community perspective. The results of our framework can aid urban planners in designing better urbanization strategies.
Many studies are in an effort to explore urban spatial structure, and urban functional regions have become the subject of increasing attention among planners, engineers and public officials. Attempts have been made to identify urban functional regions using high spatial resolution (HSR) remote sensing images and extensive geo-data. However, the research scale and throughput have also been limited by the accessibility of HSR remote sensing data. Recently, big geo-data are becoming increasingly popular for urban studies since research is still accessible and objective with regard to the use of these data. This study aims to build a novel framework to provide an alternative solution for sensing urban spatial structure and discovering urban functional regions based on emerging geo-data – points of interest (POIs) data and an embedding learning method in the natural language processing (NLP) field. We started by constructing the intraurban functional corpus using a center-context pairs-based approach. A word embeddings representation model for training that corpus was used to extract multiprototype vectors in the second step, and the last step aggregated the functional parcels based on an introduced spatial clustering method, hierarchical density-based spatial clustering of applications with noise (HDBSCAN). The clustering results suggested that our proposed framework used in this study is capable of discovering the utilization of urban space with a reasonable level of accuracy. The limitation and potential improvement of the proposed framework are also discussed.
The rapid evolution of cities has brought new challenges to urban planning and management. The accurate evaluation of urban functional structure and mixed use is critical, especially at a fine scale such as by blocks. The composition and mixing of urban spatial functions calculated by remote sensing and statistics are non-quantitative and undetailed. The text topic models are often applied to process text data, but are rarely used to mine semantic information in quantitative data. Therefore, this paper attempts to carry out research on the recognition of urban functions and mixed use using a text topic generation model based on resident mobile data. First, the area within Wuhan Third Ring Road was divided into 2451 units at a grid size of 500 m &times; 500 m. The histogram-latent Dirichlet allocation (H-LDA) and information entropy were applied to assign different grid units to correct the functional topics and topic information entropy (TIE). Second, the functional categories of different analysis units were calculated using the point of interest (POI), frequency density (FD) and category proportion (CP) indicators, while the functional information entropy (FIE) based on the POI was calculated. Then, the urban functions and mixtures identified by the two kinds of data were compared and analyzed. Finally, referring to the geographic information in streetscape map and applying correlation analysis, the function and mixing results obtained from the experiment were verified. Studies have shown that the H-LDA model can identify bridges, which the POI data have shown is challenging to identify without attributes such as length. The function recognition accuracy of the H-LDA model is 89.3%, which is higher than K-means algorithm and Word2vec models. The correlation coefficient between FIE and TIE is 0.587, indicating that both are highly correlated. These explain the accuracy and rationality of identifying city functions and mixtures based on the H-LDA model. The H-LDA model can be applied to functional computing and fine-scale urban mixed function planning.
Affinity propagation (AP) is a clustering algorithm for point data used in image recognition that can be used to solve various problems, such as initial class representative point selection, large-scale sparse matrix calculations, and large-scale data with fewer parameter settings. However, the AP clustering algorithm does not consider spatiotemporal information and multiple thematic attributes simultaneously, which leads to poor performance in discovering patterns from massive spatiotemporal points (e.g., trajectory points). To resolve this issue, a multidimensional spatiotemporal affinity propagation (MDST-AP) algorithm is proposed in this study. First, the similarity of spatial and nonspatial attributes is measured in Gaussian kernel space instead of Euclidean space, which helps address the multidimensional linear inseparability problem. Then, the Davies-Bouldin (DB) index is applied to optimize the parameter value of the MDST-AP algorithm, which is applied to analyze road congestion in Beijing via taxi trajectories. Experiments on different datasets and algorithms indicated that the MDST-AP algorithm can process multidimensional spatiotemporal data points faster and more effectively.